Using CSS counters - add reversing examples (#11529)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/css/css_counter_styles/using_css_counters/index.md

---
{{CSSRef}}

**CSS counters** let you adjust the appearance of content based on its location in a document.
For example, you can use counters to automatically number the headings in a webpage, or to change the numbering on ordered lists.

Counters are, in essence, variables maintained by CSS whose values may be incremented or decremented by CSS rules that track how many times they're used.
You can define your own named counters, and you can also manipulate the `list-item` counter that is created by default for all ordered lists.

## Using counters

### Manipulating a counter's value

To use a CSS counter, it must first be initialized to a value with the {{cssxref("counter-reset")}} property.
The property can also be used to change the counter value to any specific number.

> Below we initialise a counter named `section` to the default value (0).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below we initialize a counter named `section` to the default value (0).
```

> Below we initialise a counter named `section` to the default value (0).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below we initialize a counter named `section` to the default value (0).
```

```css
counter-reset: section;
```

> You can also initialise multiple counters, optionally specifying an initial value for each.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also initialize multiple counters, optionally specifying an initial value for each.
```

> Below we initialise a counter named `section` to the default value (0).
> 
> ```css
> counter-reset: section;
> ```
> 
> You can also initialise multiple counters, optionally specifying an initial value for each.
> Below we initialize the `section` and `topic` counters to the default value, and the `page` counter to 3.
> 
> ```css
> counter-reset: section page 3 topic;
> ```
> 
> Once initialized, a counter's value can be increased or decreased using {{cssxref("counter-increment")}}.
> For example, the following declaration would increment the `section` counter by one on every `h3` tag.
> 
> ```css
> h3::before {
>   counter-increment: section; /* Increment the value of section counter by 1 */
> }
> ```
> You can specify the value to increment or decrement the counter after the counter name, using a positive or negative number.
> 
> The counter's name must not be `none`, `inherit`, or `initial`; otherwise the declaration is ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below we initialize a counter named `section` to the default value (0).

```css
counter-reset: section;
```

You can also initialize multiple counters, optionally specifying an initial value for each.
Below we initialize the `section` and `topic` counters to the default value, and the `page` counter to 3.

```css
counter-reset: section page 3 topic;
```

Once initialized, a counter's value can be increased or decreased using {{cssxref("counter-increment")}}.
For example, the following declaration would increment the `section` counter by one on every `h3` tag.

```css
h3::before {
  counter-increment: section; /* Increment the value of section counter by 1 */
}
```
You can specify the value to increment or decrement the counter after the counter name, using a positive or negative number.

The counter's name must not be `none`, `inherit`, or `initial`; otherwise the declaration is ignored.
```

### Displaying a counter

The value of a counter can be displayed using either the {{cssxref("counter()", "counter()")}} or {{cssxref("counters()", "counters()")}} function in a {{cssxref("content")}} property.

For example, the following declaration uses `counter()` to prefix each `h3` heading with the text `Section <number>: `, where `<number>` is the value of the count in decimal (the default display style):

```css
h3::before {
  counter-increment: section;                 /* Increment the value of section counter by 1 */
  content: "Section " counter(section) ": ";  /* Display counter value in default style (decimal) */
}
```

The {{cssxref("counter()")}} function is used when the numbering of nesting levels does not include the context of parent levels.
For example, here each nested level restarts from one:

```
1 One
  1 Nested one
  2 Nested two
2 Two 
  1 Nested one
  2 Nested two
  3 Nested three
3 Three
```

The {{cssxref("counters()", "counters()")}} function is used when the count for nested levels must include the count from parent levels.

> For example, you might use this to layout sections as shown:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, you might use this to lay out sections as shown:
```

The generated text is the value of all counters with the given name in scope at the given pseudo-element, from outermost to innermost, separated by the specified string (`<separator>`).

The counter is rendered in the specified `<counter-style>` for both methods (`decimal` by default).
You can use any of the {{cssxref("list-style-type")}} values or your own [custom styles](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Counter_Styles).

Examples showing the use of `counter()` and `counter()` are given below in the [basic example](#basic_example) and [Example of a nested counter](#example_of_a_nested_counter), respectively.

### Reversed counters

A reversed counter is one that is intended to count down (decrement) rather than up (increment).
Reversed counters are created using the `reversed()` function notation when naming the counter in {{cssxref("counter-reset")}}.

Reversed counters have a default initial value equal to the number of elements (unlike normal counters, which have a default value of 0).
This makes it easy to implement a counter that counts from the number of elements down to one.

> For example, to create a reversed counter named `section` with a default initial value you would use the following syntax:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, to create a reversed counter named `section` with a default initial value, you would use the following syntax:
```

```css
counter-reset: reversed(section); 
```

You can of course specify any initial value that you like.

The counter value is decreased by specifying a negative value for {{cssxref("counter-increment")}}.

> **Note:** You can also use {{cssxref("counter-increment")}} to decrement a non-reversed counter.
> The main benefit of using a reversed counter is the default initial value, and that the `list-item` counter automatically decrements reversed counters.

### List item counters

Ordered lists, as created using {{HTMLElement("ol")}} elements, implicitly have a counter named `list-item`.

> Like other counters this has a default initial value of 0 for upward counters and "number of items" for reversed counters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like other counters, this has a default initial value of 0 for upward counters and "number of items" for reversed counters.
```

## Using counters

### Manipulating a counter's value

To use a CSS counter, it must first be initialized to a value with the {{cssxref("counter-reset")}} property (By default `0` for counters, and "number of elements" for reversed counters).
The property can also be used to change the counter value to any specific number.

Once initialized, a counter's value can be increased or decreased with {{cssxref("counter-increment")}}.
The counter's name must not be `none`, `inherit`, or `initial`; otherwise the declaration is ignored.

### Displaying a counter

The value of a counter can be displayed using either the {{cssxref("counter()", "counter()")}} or {{cssxref("counters()", "counters()")}} function in a {{cssxref("content")}} property.

The {{cssxref("counter()")}} function has two forms: 'counter(_name_)' or 'counter(_name_, _style_)'.
The generated text is the value of the innermost counter of the given name in scope at the given pseudo-element.
The counter is rendered in the specified style (`decimal` by default).

The {{cssxref("counters()")}} function also has two forms: 'counters(_name_, _string_)' or 'counters(_name_, _string_, _style_)'.

> The generated text is the value of all counters with the given name in scope at the given pseudo-element, from outermost to innermost, separated by the specified string. The counters are rendered in the specified style (`decimal` by default).

Reviewer 2: Can this be made more understandable? Perhaps with an example?

Author: Thanks @estelle . You're right. Despite the fact this is shown in green it was inherited from before I got to this section and I didn't look at it properly. Next week. 

Thanks for the review!

Reviewer: Has this resolved be subsequent updates?

Author: Yes.

This makes it easy to implement a counter that counts from the number of elements down to one.

For example, to create a reversed counter named `section` with a default initial value you would use the following syntax:

```css
counter-reset: reversed(section); 
```

You can of course specify any initial value that you like.

The counter value is decreased by specifying a negative value for {{cssxref("counter-increment")}}.

> **Note:** You can also use {{cssxref("counter-increment")}} to decrement a non-reversed counter.
> The main benefit of using a reversed counter is the default initial value, and that the `list-item` counter automatically decrements reversed counters.

### List item counters

Ordered lists, as created using {{HTMLElement("ol")}} elements, implicitly have a counter named `list-item`.

Like other counters this has a default initial value of 0 for upward counters and "number of items" for reversed counters.
Unlike author-created counters, `list-item` _automatically_ increments or decrements by one for each list element, depending on whether or not the counter is reversed.

> This counter can be used to manipulate the default behavior of ordered lists using CSS.

Reviewer 2: which counter?

Author: I thought it was inferred since this is the only counter we're talking about in this section.

```suggestion
The `list-item` counter can be used to manipulate the default behavior of ordered lists using CSS.
```

{{EmbedLiveSample("Basic_example", "100%", 150)}}

### Basic example: reversed counter

This example is the same as the one above but uses a reversed counter.
If your browser supports the `reversed()` function notation, the result will look like this:

> ![reversed counter](reversed_headings_basic.png)

Reviewer 2: alt attribute

Author: @estelle Markdown doesn't support an alt attribute right?

Reviewer: ` ![reversed counter](reversed_headings_basic.png)` does cause an `alt="reversed counter"` attribute in the DOM, right?

Author: I think so, but you don't do anything special extra to get it. In any case, if it is a problem it is one that is not specific to this PR.

Author: I'm marking this resolved.

#### CSS

```css
body {
  counter-reset: reversed(section);           /* Set a counter named 'section', and its initial value is 0. */
}

h3::before {
  counter-increment: section -1;              /* Decrement the value of section counter by 1 */
  content: "Section " counter(section) ": ";  /* Display the word 'Section ', the value of
                                                 section counter, and a colon before the content
                                                 of each h3 */
}
```

#### HTML

```html
<h3>Introduction</h3>
<h3>Body</h3>
<h3>Conclusion</h3>
```

#### Result

{{EmbedLiveSample("Reversing a counter", "100%", 150)}}

### A more sophisticated example

> A counter need not necessarily be shown every time is incremented.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A counter need not necessarily be shown every time it is incremented.
```

> This example counts all links, however the counter is shown only when a link has no text, as a convenient replacement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This example counts all links with the counter showing only when a link has no text, as a convenient replacement.
```
